First of all, Mr. Heller, tell us something about
your early life, including the names of your
parents, the dates and places of their birth and
death, the date and place of your birth, and the
schools you attended before you entered Texas
A&M.
Well, my father's name was Louis F. Heller.
I don't remember his date, but he was 49 years old
when he died in 1940.
My mother's name was Annie Ann Haller.
She was 70 years old when she died in 1940. I
lived in Victoria and tended St. Joseph's school,
a Catholic school, before I went to A&M.
I don't know. Do you remember where your mother and
father were born? My father was born in Victoria,
Texas, and my mother in St. Louis, Missouri. And
she would have moved to Victoria? Yeah, they come
in there. grandfather was a brewer and he put up a
brewery down there in Victoria, Texas and was in
business there up until the time they began to ship
ice in there over the railroads and then that cut
his business out because they wanted ice beer
instead of new home beer. What kind of business was
your father in? He was in the dry goods business.
Had that drag of the business for some time in 1895
or 6, I think.
I just had that recently, but.
He and his brother started the business in 1891.
But the brother went to Yoakum to open up a store.
And Lewis Halley, he kept the store in Victoria.
And he was there up until 1949 when he died of a heart
attack. Mother had the store then for
three or four years. then sold it to the brother. He
came back to Victoria. At that time, he had sold his
store before and he didn't have any
occupation. Uh-huh. And then, so, you were born in
Victoria. I was born in Victoria. And what was the
date of your birth? April the 10th, 1895. Okay. I'm
not sure that I caught the age of your father at his
death. He was 49. 49. And he died when? In 1919.
1919. Oh, OK. I seemed to think that you had said
1940 earlier. Well, mother died. Your mother died
in 1940. Well, I was married only two weeks before
the father died. Uh-huh. What factors were
involved in your choice of Texas A&M? Why did you
decide to go there? Well, before they had some
land, had some farmland, and I wanted to go there to
learn how to farm.
I wasn't interested into being a businessman. I
wanted to go outdoors. And where was this land? It
was in Victoria County. Victoria County. What
procedures did you go through to enter Texas A&M?
Well, I didn't have any particular. I entered it on
a special permission from the president. Had you
finished Victoria High School? No. No. I didn't
finish any high school. So you had to have special
permission to enter at age 16? Yeah. And what were
your reactions to the school when you first
arrived? Did you know enough about it to know what
to expect? No, I didn't know a thing about it. You
just knew that there was a Texas A&M and wanted to go
there? Texas A&M, yeah. I don't think anybody ever
said anything to me about it before. Oh, I had a
brother there that was there a year, a year ahead of
me. Yeah. So you were... He could have told you then
a little bit about the problems the freshmen
encountered when they got there. Yeah, I guess he
did tell me about it.
I was lucky, though. I didn't get hazed too much. I
got one whip in one time with these triangle
rulers. It got a groove in it, you know, and they
sting. They sting, yeah.
I'm assuming you arrived there by train. Did you
arrive during the day or during the night?
Father took me up there, but I don't know how we got
there. Whether we had to go to Bryan, stop at a hotel
there, and then come out on that trolley. Probably
did that, but I don't remember. Okay.
Did you have any choice in the military company to
which you were assigned the first year?
I don't think I was. I think they just put me where
they wanted me. Where they had place, huh? They put
me in Company C when I first went up there and then I
went to Company B and stayed in Company B I guess
about three years. And where were you housed in
Company C? Company C was housed in Foster. So that
was one of the older dormitories. I presume you had
the pleasure of holding wood and water for the
upperclassmen? Yeah, wood and water. And the
other one was in Goodwin Hall. We had a little
better accommodations there. Yeah, that one was a
fairly new one at that time, wasn't it? Goodwin is
now used as a classroom building. It is? Yeah. I
don't know exactly when it was converted to
classroom, but quite a long while back, I believe.
Would you describe a typical day while you were
there? Sort of tell us what you did during a whole
day, when you got up and what you did the first thing
and when you went to class and what you did in the
afternoon, if you can remember. And when you went
to bed?
No, I pretty well followed the schedule.
I don't know. Do you remember what the schedule
was? I sure don't.
Can you tell us a little bit about life in the
dormitories, particularly in Foster Hall? What
sort of things did you have to do?
Did I see Foster Hall? Yeah, I believe so. Yeah.
It wasn't Foster Hall. There was another one down
there. Was it Prez Ross?
I had it on my mind a while ago, but I... Well, in
Goodwin Hall,
we often would come into our room and find a push the
door open and get hit with a pan or a bucket of water.
And that's about the only The day I got there, of
course, I wasn't a freshman then, but those pranks
would go on anyhow. You mentioned earlier that you
had a brother who went there the year before you
did. Did he go back the second year? Yeah, they had a
two-year course at that time, and he finished his
two-year course. Yes, but I went on to finish the
four-year course. Did you by any chance room with
him the first year you were there? Yes, I roomed
with him. So you had a sophomore as your roommate
the first year. Was there a little bit of an
advantage to having that? I believe it was. You had
a little bit of protection. However, he didn't get
me out at one time.
I suppose it would have been a little bit of an
advantage to have a sophomore older brother on
your side, at least part of the time.
Back to the dormitories, I believe the old ones
were Foster, Ross, Austin, and Pfeiffer.
Pfeiffer's the one. Pfeiffer's the one. Okay.
Did they have inside showers and inside latrines?
No, when we were in Pfeiffer, we had to go about two
or three blocks to an auditorium down there with
one separate building with showers. And when you
walked in there, that sulfur smell was awful. Do
they still have that up there now? Well, they all
have showers in all the dormitories, and I don't
notice a sulfur smell to the water. Well, when you
used to walk in that place, there's an awful smell
of sulfur. Walk down there and take your shower,
and then walk about a block or so back to your dorm.
What about a latrine? Did you have those in the
building, or were they in a separate building too?
Yeah, they were there. I think they were in . I don't
remember when it was. There was a time somewhere
about the turn of the century where they had a brick
out building, which they called the sink. That was
the only, well, maybe I shouldn't say the only
toilet, but that's what it was. It was a rather
small brick building with a real tall chimney that
they called the sink.
But in the new dormitory, Goodman, you had showers
and toilets. toilets on every floor, I think. They
had one tub, I think, on each floor, too. One tub
there.
What about the food in the mess hall? I believe you
had two different mess halls while you were there,
didn't you? The old one burned one year. Yeah, the
first one burned on the eleventh day of the
eleventh month of the eleventh year. So that would
have been your first year there, wouldn't it?
Yeah, the first year I hadn't been there very long.
And
I don't remember getting into that new one at all. I
guess I did in about 1915. Yeah, I believe they had
it in about 12 or 13, but you had a temporary. Well,
that one burned down, and then they built a
temporary one after that. out of galvanized iron.
And the night after a dance, White caught a fire and
burned up. And I think they sent us home for several
weeks right around the Christmas time.
So we had to eat with the mess kits.
But that was the year of the fires, too. There was
more fires there in 11 and 12. And any year that I
know of, I believe they'd have. They had that mess
hall, I think the main building burned. The main
building burned in 12 sometime. And then there's a
tent, there's a tent row out there. The tents
caught a fire, and then the steam plant had a fire
down there. They must have had 10 or 12 fires in that
one year. All in that one between September and
May. Did
you know any of the people who lived in the tents?
Yeah, boys that
used to run around with, but I can't, I think one
name was Colin, but he's been dead many years. I
imagine the life in the tent was a little bit
different than that in the dormitory, wasn't it?
Oh, it must have been. Particularly when it got
cold. Oh, yeah. They had stoves in them, though, I
believe, didn't they? Well, they had some kind of a
stove, but I don't remember.
Yeah, come rainy weather, too, there was no
pavement there, and that ground would get wet, and
it would be nasty. What about the ground between
the other buildings? Was there any kind of
walkways? I'm sure you didn't have concrete
sidewalks like we have today, but... Did you have
any gravel walks or anything like that to keep them
getting in the mud so much?
I don't know just what they
did.
Can you tell me about any privileges that the
upperclassmen, that is the sophomores, juniors,
and seniors, might have had that the freshmen
didn't have?
What sort of things could they do that, as a
freshman, you couldn't do?
I don't know as about that, but I did. There's two
trains come in there, the INGN and Southern
Pacific. Well, I could take one train and go to
Navasota and see a girl. and catch the other train
and come back and get back by midnight. So they
probably had hours that you could stay out on. But
that would have been after your freshman year, I
think, if you could do that.
What kind of things did you do for recreation or
entertainment? Well, I walked out quite a bit on
the days off, took Kodak pictures. Did you keep
those Kodak pictures? Yeah, I got them, but I can't
find them. I mean, did you take pictures of the
campus or the... Well, there's a campus from the
surrounding country and we would take long hikes
and go to the little old store out there on, I don't
know which direction it is, I'd get mixed up in the
directions. of there because east is west and so
forth. So I went out to the little old store and
had a bunch of carnation, dime brand carnation
milk and ginger crackers and almost got sick on
eating that. And there was a Bohemians had a hall
just pretty close to the campus there and they used
to have parties. And we used to go over there, and
the boys would bring home some of that sausage, you
know, and stick it under the nose of some of the boys
in the dormitory. It was a strong-smelling
sausage. Uh-huh. Was that some of the boys that
didn't like the sausage? They were kind of
bedeviling with the smell, huh? Yeah. Did the
student body or the Corps of Cadets, as they were
when you were there, take a long hike down to the
brasses for a night or two while you were there?
I don't think we did, but we used to go at night and go
coon hunting. go coon hunting. They had a neighbor
on there that had some dogs and he'd go coon
hunting. Uh-huh. You mean just go off the campus
someplace to go coon hunting? Yeah, go coon
hunting. The Corps used to go to Dallas to the fair.
Then we'd take our uniforms and our guns and we'd do
some parading there at the Dallas County Fair.
But that's the only time that I know that we went in a
group.
Okay. Did you have any favorite instructors?
Well,
Thornton was an instructor, and he is the one that
taught me into four years of finishing my course,
four years. And Bill Singh. The entomology, I kind
of liked him, and I was interested in entomology,
although my major is supposed to be agronomy.
Yeah, this is, the Thornton, is that Duke
Thornton? I believe that's what they called him.
He was in chemistry? I don't know what he was. Or
chemical engineering? I guess he was. He's still
living? Yes. My assistant interviewed him a
couple weeks ago in this same program. The most
distinguished professor there was old Botany
Ball. O.M. Ball? O.M. Ball. Did you have courses
under him? Yeah. How about Dr. Francis in vet
medicine? Oh yeah, Dr. Francis, he was a I always
enjoyed going to his class because it turned out to
be a show. What sort of things did he do? I don't
know. He'd say something that would get the class
tickled. He kept his class, I think, a pretty good
mule.
What... attitude or opinion did the students have
toward the administration? That would be both to
the president and to the commandant. I believe you
had two different presidents while you were
there, didn't you? Yeah, I had Catfish... Milner?
Catfish Milner.
And Bissell, I think, wasn't it? Yeah, Bissell.
Well... It seemed to me like everything was going
fine. However, we did get out on a strike. And I
think there's some, they had company football
teams. And the boys on, I think it was Company D, got
thrown off the team, several of them did. I don't
know why. But there's 466 of us struck and went
home. Some of the boys, when they got home, why,
their father sent them right back. But my father
let me stay home several weeks, and he finally said
either go to school or go to work. So we went back up.
When we got to college, we had to humiliate
ourselves and sign a pledge not to strike.
I've heard a couple of people refer to Mr. Milner as
Catfish Milner. Do you have any idea where he got
that nickname? I believe it's the shape of his
mouth. I'm not sure. I'm not sure, but I think it's
the shape of his mouth.
What about Dr. Bazell? Did the students have
any... Now, back to the strike a minute. Was
that... Strike, was Mr.
Milner involved in that strike at all? I don't
think so. I don't know what it brought about. At
that time, we were following the crowd. Uh-huh.
But a whole bunch of you. Yeah. I don't know how many
students were at that place at that time, but it
seems to me something like about 750. It may have
been more than that. But a whole bunch of you took
off and went home. Yeah, it was 400 and I think it's
466. Mm-hmm. And then some of them came right back,
and some of them came back after a while. Yeah,
Father, Son, and back, and they finally drove
back. Probably some of them never did come back.
Mm-hmm. I went back. Did you have to make up for lost
time when you came back? I mean, you missed several
weeks. No, we didn't make it. Of course, we had to
pass our tests as they come. So you didn't have to
make up all the work that you missed. No, I didn't
have to put in any extra.
What about to the commandant? Did you have any
run-in with him? Do you remember who the
commandant was? No, I never had any. Never had any
trouble in the military line at all. Do you
remember who the commandant was? I don't know. I
got a yearbook there. I probably would tell you.
Oh, OK. Well, I'm sorry. I was just wondering if you
remembered right offhand what his name was and if
you had any thoughts about him.
We know that a lot of the students had some type of
employment while they were at school. Did you ever
have a part-time job while you were there? Well,
the first money I ever really earned in my life was
counting tags to go on feed bags. But that didn't
last long. That was only for a few days.
You did that at school? There was one fellow that
used to come around with a bucket with candy and go
around selling candy. And I
don't know of any other ones that That worked at
all. There may have been some working in the mess
hall. But I don't know of anybody else. Did the
students who played football and basketball,
well you didn't have basketball then, but
football and baseball for the college team have
any special privileges?
I don't know. They have a separate table for them to
eat at?
Let's see. I did go through your senior yearbook,
and there was an indication there that you
belonged to a number of organizations. And I'd
like to ask you about those, if you remember what
they were. One of them was the Foundry Toter Club.
I don't know. I belonged to a Newman Club there.
Yeah, that was, I believe, the Catholic Boys Club.
I don't know of any special thing we did. We would
have to go to Bryan to go to Mass on Sundays at that
time. Was the whole Corps of Cadets marched to the
chapel for services on Sunday?
There was a period when I know that they were all
marched to the chapel, or was in the assembly hall,
sometimes called the assembly hall, and then the
chapel. I don't remember anything about that. But
anyway, the Catholic boys went to Bryan, to the
church. Went to Bryan. There was an organization
called the 466 Club. Do you remember anything
about that? That's the strike. Okay. That's the
strike bunch. That's the strike, huh? So it was
what, 466 of you? It was 466 of us. Well, a strike.
What about the Veterans of the Lost Cause? Well,
that was an organization where you dress up in
tacky clothes. Mm-hmm. And some ridiculous goes,
I got a picture in there of me.
So you just did that on one day? Yeah, I think it was
just one day. It only was. I was wondering whether
that might have had something to do with the
strike, too, whether that was the fellows who came
back. No. No, I think that was an annual event. We
were all privates, I think. Well, let's see.
Would that have been junior privates? Would that
have been privates who were juniors? According to
the yearbook, you were veterans of the lost cause
in 13 and 14, which would have been your junior
year. Well, I guess it belongs to those that have
been privates all their lives. There was no
corporals, no sergeants, no officers, nothing.
That was the lost cause.
And then according to that, you stayed as a private
all four years. Yeah, I stayed a private all four
years. I gather you didn't... I had the honor of
being officer of the day several times, but I was
still a private. You were still a private.
And... But, okay.
When you... Graduated then in the spring of 1915.
Did you have a job lined up for you, or what did you
do? Well, the father had this farm, and I went on to
it.
And so you did general farming there for a while,
huh? Yeah, started the farm. What kind of crop did
you raise? mostly cotton at that time. And for how
long did you do that? Well, I did that
I guess there for about three years, and then he
bought another farm. I had two farms then, and I
went to the second farm, which was a diversified
farm. It had cattle, timber, and seven different
grades of land. Where was that, Luke? It's in
Victoria County, but it was about 15 miles apart.
Did you participate in the First World War at all?
First World War? Yeah, I was in the First World War.
In what capacity? I stayed as a special duty at
Travis. writing service records, data and
service records. Then after the war ended, they
transferred me over to Kelly Field and I was in the
Quartermaster at Kelly Field. And so you say that
was after the war ended? Yeah. And then you stayed
in the Army for a little while then? No, I was
discharged on January 26, 19,
19, from the, from Kelly Field. From Kelly Field,
and where did you go after that? Well, I married on
March the 3rd, 1919, and I stayed on these, on these
farms until we got